How big will Japanese animation be in 2023? I’m no economist, but my gut says pretty big. Past performance is not an indicator of future results, but the trends are pretty clear: The anime industry has been on the rise for over a decade (minus a blip in 2020 on account of the pandemic), and 2022 appears to have been yet another banner year with titles like Suzume and Chainsaw Man grabbing even more converts. Still, that success isn't spread evenly. In a crowded field, it can be hard for original anime (that is, series or films not based on manga, novels or other anime) to stand out. A few years ago, nontraditional sources of funding (i.e. streaming services) seemed like a ray of hope for more daring properties, but reports now show even streamers are moving away from originals into safer territory as competition for subscribers heats up. So, in 2023, look for most studios to play it safe by adapting titles with built-in fanbases. On TV, there are plenty of sequels on the way, such as more seasons of Dr. Stone, Jujutsu Kaisen and Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba — all adaptations of popular manga published in the same dominant weekly magazine. It’s the same story for theaters, with familiar faces like Detective Conan, Doraemon and Sailor Moon all set for new movies. Here are some anime films I’m looking forward to this year: In February, there’s Blue Giant, an adaptation of a manga about a young jazz saxophonist. OK, I was just grumbling about adaptations, but in this case, anime offers one big advantage over the original manga — you can actually hear the music the characters are playing. The film is helmed by Yuzuru Tachikawa, an innovative director who once worked under Shinichiro Watanabe (Cowboy Bebop, Kids on the Slope), well known for his jazz-infused anime series. I’m also looking forward to Cherry and Virgin, an independent production from director Masanao Kawajiri about a romance between two illustrators. Kawajiri’s autobiographical self-produced short A Japanese Boy Who Draws from 2018 blended different art genres to portray its various characters’ inner lives, and Cherry and Virgin, which is being produced outside the anime studio system (Kawajiri refers to it as alternative anime), does the same thing, with its two protagonists appearing in two totally different styles. This year won’t feature films from current heavy hitters Mamoru Hosoda or Makoto Shinkai (the two directors released films in 2021 and 2022, respectively). But we are getting one from the GOAT (greatest of all time), Hayao Miyazaki. After several members of the production staff dropped hints the animation was nearly complete in 2022, the release of Miyazaki’s new film, tentatively titled How Do You Live? was officially announced in December for July 2023. To say this is 2023’s most highly anticipated anime film is an understatement: Not only is Miyazaki widely considered Japan’s best animator, but this will also likely be the 82-year-old master’s final film (though he did say the same thing about the last one). One young director who deserves to be mentioned in the same breath as Hosoda and Shinkai is Naoko Yamada, who’s helmed films like A Silent Voice and Liz and the Blue Bird. Her upcoming film, Kimi no Iro (Your Color), is about a young woman who can see the colors in people’s hearts. If it’s anything as insightful and sensitive as Yamada’s previous films, it will likely be one of 2023’s best. On the small screen, I’ll be checking out The Fire Hunter, a fantasy series written by Mamoru Oshii (Ghost in the Shell, Jin-Roh: The Wolf Brigade) and scored by his longtime collaborator Kenji Kawai, as well as Phoenix: Eden17, a new take on Osamu Tezuka’s classic Phoenix manga animated at the always interesting Studio 4 degrees. Turning to general industry trends, efforts in Japan to get more people working and living outside Tokyo continue apace, and anime continues to be a part of those efforts. In 2022, Kochi Prefecture in southern Kyushu announced a public-private partnership to bring anime creation to the area. One part of the initiative, announced last November, is a full-length anime film set and produced in Kochi. Helmed by a young first-time director, Umi no Machi Monogatari(Seaside Town Story) will center around legends about local deities. It sounds exactly like the kind of project conceived to get approved for public-private funding, but if it brings enough young talent to Kochi, something more inventive might follow. Meanwhile, Niigata Prefecture, on Japan’s west coast, will host the inaugural Niigata International Animation Film Festival this March. With a focus on commercial, full-length animated films, the festival looks to avoid competition with established art-centric festivals in Hiroshima and Hokkaido — and to help Niigata become the world capital of animation by the end of the 21st century. The jury chairman for the festival is a familiar face for anime fans: the aforementioned director Mamoru Oshii. The festival’s lineup will be announced in late January when we’ll have a better idea of what kind of projects this first-time event is able to attract from Japan and abroad. While getting folks to work outside of Tokyo is the goal, some animators are traveling a little farther afield than the government would like. For years, there have been reports about Japanese animators making more money in China than they can in Japan — and that was before the value of the yen cratered in 2022. Last year, veteran animator Jun Arai claimed he was offered over 100 times the Japanese market price to supervise a Chinese project. Another 2022 report said Chinese animators make an average of ¥5.2 million a year compared to an average of ¥1.9 million in Japan. Now, in the work-from-home age, some Japanese animators might be working on Chinese projects without actually moving abroad, but that still means less staff for the perpetually labor-strapped domestic industry.
